.\"	man page for pfaedit by tom harvey, subsequently modified by george
.Dd September 5, 2001
.Dt PFAEDIT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pfaedit
.Nd create and modify PostScript fonts
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl new
.Op Fl recover={none|auto|clean}
.Nm ""
.Ar fontname
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
allows you to create and modify PostScript fonts. You can save fonts in
several different PostScript formats as well as TrueType, OpenType and CID-keyed fonts.
It will also generate bitmaps.
.Pp
If the
.Fl new
flag is specified, a new PostScript font with the ISO 8859-1 encoding (the
international encoding standard for western Europe, and the
standard for most X fonts) will be created.
.Pp
If the
.Fl recover
flag is specified, you can control PfaEdit's crash recovery mechanism \(em just
in case the crash recovery itself causes problems. -recover=none will not attempt
to recover from crashes on this run, while -recover=clean will delete any
recovery information.
.Pp
If a
.Ar fontname
is given,
.Nm
will open a font view looking at each font you selected. This may be a binary
or ascii PostScript type1 font (.pfa or .pfb extensions) or one of pfaedit's
spline font database files (.sfd extension), or even a PostScript type 0 font
(.ps extension, though the encoding will probably be lost here), a true type
font (.ttf), an opentype font (.otf), a CID-keyed font or a bitmap font (.bdf).
.Pp
Without flags or arguments,
.Nm
will open a file picker dialog and allow you to browse your disk to find the
appropriate font file, or create a new one.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ~/.PfaEdit/autosave/ -compact
.It Pa ~/.PfaEdit/autosave/
crash recovery directory
.El
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/pfaedit/*.ui -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/pfaedit/*.ui
translations for the user interface
.El
.Bl -tag -width *.cidmap -compact
.It Pa *.cidmap
"encoding" files for Adobe's cid formats
.br
from http://pfaedit.sourceforge.net/cidmaps.tgz
.El
.\" .Sh EXAMPLES
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Sh SEE ALSO
The pfaedit user manual, at
.Pa http://pfaedit.sourceforge.net/
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHOR
George Williams
.Sh BUGS
No doubt many. But unknown (and ever changing).
