.\"	man page for sfddiff by george williams
.Dd March 9, 2002
.Dt SFDDIFF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sfddiff
.Nd compare or merge two of pfaedit's sfd font files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl merge Ar outfile
.Op Fl ignorehints
.Op Fl version
.Op Fl help
.Ar sfdfile1
.Ar sfdfile2
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
Will compare two sfd files. It will notice
.br
  1) if the two fonts have different encodings
.br
  2) any characters present in one font but not in the other
.br
  3) any characters present in both fonts but which have different sets of
outlines or references.
.br
  4) optionally will check if the hints are different.
.Pp
If the
.Fl merge
flag is specified the following argument should be the name of an output file
into which sfddiff will store a merged version of the two fonts. This will contain
everything from
.Ar sfdfile1
as well as any characters present in
.Ar sfdfile2
but not in
.Ar sfdfile1.
For any characters with different outlines or references, the background of the
the character will contain the splines from
.Ar sfdfile2
(sadly references can not be placed in the background).
.Pp
If the
.Fl ignorehints
flag is specified, then no hint differences will be reported.
.Pp
.Fl help
will provide a mini description and will list the available options.
.Pp
.Fl usage
will list the available options.
.Pp
.Fl version
will display the current version of
.Nm
(a six digit string containing
the date stamp of the source files).
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" .Sh FILES
.\" .Sh EXAMPLES
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Sh SEE ALSO
The pfaedit user manual, at
.Pa http://pfaedit.sourceforge.net/
.\" .Sh STANDARDS
.\" .Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHOR
George Williams
.\" .Sh BUGS
