The main Portfile to build with macports is included here. There has
become a little post processing step and the make-package.sh simply
uses the create-osx-app-bundle.sh script to create an app.zip file
from the macports built sources.

As at April 2014 the build is performed using the following script
sequence. The make-package script will create
~/Desktop/FontForge.app.zip which you can then archive and upload that
file as desired. The script which does the upload is not in this
repository as it includes some authentication credentials and is
specific to the current distribution site.

./force-rebuild.sh
./run-post-build-gc-fudge.sh
./make-package.sh

You will have to have the bdwgc built and installed for FontForge to
build. The rebuild done by run-post-build-gc-fudge.sh is to get around
a bug during the macports build which causes a bad gc interaction
resulting in a crash when running FontForge. During setup bdwgc was
not available though macports itself, in the future this may change
and thus it will become a dep of the Portfile and no longer need
manual installation.

The core of the run-post-build-gc-fudge.sh script is to move to the build
subdirectory inside
/opt/local/var/macports/build/...
and run
$ make clean
$ make

The run-post-build-gc-fudge.sh script is left out as the exact
subdirectory in /opt/local/var/macports/build will vary depending on
how you have your macports configured.

As you can see in the post-extract of the Portfile a copy of gnulib is
also expected to be found at /usr/local/src/github-fontforge/gnulib.
This is not strictly needed and you can modify the Portfile to avoid
it but having a reliance on that local copy means much less network
traffic and thus is useful for repeated builds.

You will also want to configure your macports environment to include
in binaries so that the link paths can be modified for packaged
execution.

For example, the file
/opt/local/share/macports/Tcl/port1.0/portconfigure.tcl default
configure.ldflags {"-L${prefix}/lib -Wl,-headerpad_max_install_names"}

This is a Travis test.
